---
layout: post
title:  "This blog is now live (for real)!"
date:   2021-12-19 01:01:26 -0500
categories: metablog books physics
---

I created this site a few years ago with the intent of starting a blog. Life got in the way
(probably for the best, as the web is now spared the insufferable thoughts of me-as-an-undergrad),
and three years later I'm going to try again.

I promise to start posting for real before the end of the month, lest I fall into the trap of [only
blogging about why I don't blog more](https://xkcd.com/621/). But for this post, I'll limit myself
to an introduction.

## Why am I doing this, anyway?

We are gathered here today because:

* ~~Men would rather start a blog than go to therapy.~~
* ~~I'm an insufferable hipster and blogging is finally retro.~~
* ~~My opinions are too "real" for the rest of the internet, and goddammit, people need to hear them!~~
* ...

Okay, maybe there isn't a singular reason.

## What am I going to write about?

Everything. That said, I expect most of my posts will be centered around:

### Book reviews

A subset of books I've read in the past couple years, which I plan to review at some point:

* Jane Jacobs -- *The Death and Life of Great American Cities*
* Thomas Kuhn -- *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*
* Carmen Maria Machado -- *Her Body and Other Parties*

Some books I'm currently reading, planning on reading, or planning on re-reading, and which I may or may
not end up reviewing:

* Susanna Clarke -- *Piranesi*
* Edward S. Herman & Noam Chomsky -- *Manufacturing Consent*
* Vladimir Nabokov -- *Pale Fire*
* Steven Weinberg -- *The Quantum Theory of Fields*

### Physics

My day job is as a physics PhD student, so naturally, I'll spend some time writing about physics.

I wouldn't call this a "science outreach" blog, in that I'm not interested in discussing physics
non-mathematically. Science writing, when you can't use terms like "orthogonal" or "isomorphic" or
"to leading order", is an entirely different skill that I'm not very good at (plenty of other people
*are* very good at it; go read [Quanta](https://www.quantamagazine.org/)). But when possible, I'll
try to keep things accessible to undergrads, technically minded non-physicists, and precocious high
schoolers.

If I had to point to a gold standard for the technical-but-still-conversational type of science
writing I'd like to do, it would be [these](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3327)
[three](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=3712) [posts](https://scottaaronson.blog/?p=1720) by Scott
Aaronson. When I write about science, it'll be with the conscious goal of imitating his style.

### Programming

I sometimes hack random projects together in my spare time. Several will be showcased here. Stay tuned.

### Politics & Philosophy

I expect political posts will comprise a minority of my writing here, and rank punditry will
comprise an even smaller minority of that.

This is not because my political views aren't important, or because I believe in being "civil" or
"apolitical". It's because I rarely feel like I have anything to add. Although all writing is to
some extent political, most *overtly* political writing is bad, and the handful who can do it well
are more talented than I am.

That said, if I think of a particularly sharp argument or a useful framing, I won't hesitate to
sound off.

## What else?

Earlier, when I said there wasn't a single reason for starting this blog, perhaps I was being more
pithy than honest. If there *is* a reason, it's the memory of a time before I used social media,
before everything was about centralization and doomscrolling and reply guys, when the internet
seemed to present boundless possibility, when it was a place that people could share things they
loved...

...and the vain hope that maybe it could be that way again.

If you'll permit me a further extension of this embarrassing measure of sincerity, then in the spirit
of sharing things we love, I'd like to close with a poem by Edna St. Vincent Millay:

> Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.  
> Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,  
> And lay them prone upon the earth and cease  
> To ponder on themselves, the while they stare  
> At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere  
> In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese  
> Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release  
> From dusty bondage into luminous air.  
> O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,  
> When first the shaft into his vision shone  
> Of light anatomized! Euclid alone  
> Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they  
> Who, though once only and then but far away,  
> Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.
