---
layout: post
title: Half-baked Nobel predictions
categories: [physics, books]
---

Happy Nobel season, everyone! I thought I might post my predictions publicly this year, so when I'm
proven wildly off-base, I can take solace in the fact that I gave everyone a good laugh. And hey, if
I get one right, I'll be able to brag about it.

I'm limiting myself to 3 serious predictions per prize. Without further ado:

----

## Medicine:

Most of what I know about the current state of biology comes from talking to biophysicists at
parties, which makes this a tricky one.

**Predictions:** This year's obvious favorite is **someone who worked on the mRNA COVID vaccines**.
A biologist friend suggested **optogenetics**, so I'll shamelessly steal it (thanks Eric!). And
maybe Mary-Claire King, for discovering **BRCA**.

**Who do I *want* to win, even though they have no chance?** Tang and Wiesenfeld for self-organized
criticality.


## Physics:

The last prize was in complex systems, and three of the last five were some form of astrophysics.
Not much prizeworthy has happened on the hep-ex front since the Higgs, so I think it's safe to
assume the new one will be in condensed matter or AMO.

**Predictions:** From an outsider's point of view, the most likely discoveries to win seem like
**twisted bilayer graphene** (Jarillo-Herrero et al), **slow light** (Hau et al), or **Bell
inequality tests** (Aspect et al). Quantum computing strikes me as a possibility in a few years,
once the quantum supremacy claims are more substantiated, but not right now.

**Who do I *want* to win, even though they have no chance?** Literally any field theorist.

## Chemistry:

**Predictions:** Somehow, nobody's won a Nobel for **quorum sensing** or **metal-organic
frameworks** yet! Wolf prizes have been awarded for both (Bassler and Yaghi respectively), which
should boost the odds a bit more. Drug-design people seem very excited about targeted protein
degradation, but I get the sense that it's pretty new, and it might just be a flash in the pan, so
I'll use my third prediction on the **AlphaFold** team.

**Who do I *want* to win, even though they have no chance?** The guys who made aducanumab---just to
fuck with everyone.

## Literature:

Everyone always bets on Murakami, but they're starting to sound like the "year of desktop Linux"
people. Ngũgĩ would normally be my top choice, but Gurnah won last year, so I think they might wait
a bit on him.

**Predictions:** The vote occurred after **Salman Rushdie** was stabbed, so assuming someone nominated
him, he could be an even more likely contender than usual. Selecting **Laszlo Krasznahorkai** would
make me very happy, and what's more, he's the sort of writer who the committee tends to like. And
while I'm on the theme of "authors who've become quizbowl in-jokes," I could easily see **Edwidge
Danticat** winning as well.

**Who do I *want* to win, even though they have no chance?** Thomas Pynchon. Or, if I happen to be on
Twitter that day, Joyce Carol Oates.

## Peace:

Peace Prize forecasting is another hard one, if only because it's so tempting to bet on people
who've been in the news recently. But since I don't have the time to Google for notable activists,
I'm going to do just that.

**Predictions:** **Alexei Navalny**, **Greta Thunberg**, and **Joe Biden**.

**Who do I *want* to win, even though they have no chance?** Pussy Riot.

---

These are all, of course, based entirely on vibes. Don't read to much into them. And yes, I'm
well aware that the Nobels are flawed and overrated and *[gasp]* Problematic---that only makes this kind of
speculation more fun!
