---
layout: post
title:  "In defense of sandwich photos"
date:   2022-01-01 16:14:17 -0500
categories: musings
---

I've seen a lot of internet arguments where someone referenced [the xkcd comic
below](https://xkcd.com/915/). It's always rubbed me the wrong way, and one day I opened a blank
file to articulate *why*, so now you get this close-reading.

![xkcd #915, in which a character argues that wine has no more depth than completely random
things](/assets/images/xkcd_connoisseur.png)

\[Note that this comic was written in 2011, long before Biden was president. If you'd like, you can
substitute a mostly-inconsequential public figure of your choice.\]

Are the views expressed by second stick figure the same as Randall's? I think it's highly likely:
the guy in the white hat is usually written to have bad opinions, and he expresses his point in the
snobbiest possible way. Plus it would fit with [this later comic](https://xkcd.com/1534/)). So for
convenience, I'll assume the comic's thesis is that opinions on wine are mostly pointless.

Before we proceed, I should make three things clear about my thoughts on taste:
* While price and quality can be correlated in some regimes, equating the two is paranoid posturing
  at best and rank classism at worst.
* Furthermore, quality is not objective, and different people can and should enjoy different things.
* If you happen to be a nerd about something inconsequential, "how do you stand \[inferior thing\]"
  is generally the worst way to share it.

Alright, with that out of the way, let's move on:

This comic is usually trotted out as an argument against thinking *too* carefully about the contents
of your glass. It's the ["let people enjoy
things"](https://www.vox.com/culture/2019/5/16/18618425/let-people-enjoy-things-criticism) of food
and drink. It promises to stand up to snobbery, but replaces it with smarm. So as someone who enjoys
tasting new wines (and new coffees, and new beers, and new burgers), I should reject it, much like
caring about negative reviews should compel people to reject "let people enjoy things". Right?

Well, here's the thing: I think Randall's point is basically valid. If I spent even a week staring
at photos of Joe Biden eating a sandwich, *of course* I'd notice things about them and start to
develop opinions. And the thought process I use to figure out why I like something is similar for
wine, fonts, landscapes---anything subjective, really. It's all just drawing boundaries in a large
parameter space (though it's a bit less true for art, which is made with the goal of communicating
something).

This leaves us at an impasse. Either we can admit that caring about details is pointless and stick
to surface-level impressions, or we can twist ourselves into ad hoc rhetorical knots to justify why
the things *we* care about are truly special and worthy of our evaluation. What should we choose?

...The correct choice is to take a step back, and admit that arguing about Biden sandwich photos
would be fucking awesome.

Imagine if you had strong opinions on Joe Biden sandwich photos, and what's more, *that this were a
normal thing in American society*. Every week or two, a White House photographer posts a new
sandwich frame, and the internet erupts with hot takes about the lighting, or the choice of mustard,
or why everything's been going downhill since the ciabatta era. You find a gem from the archives and
text it to your friend, who agrees with your assessment and thanks you for the recommendation. You
get to have an opinion on whether the Lettuce-Pattern Tie of '15 was clever or just gauche, and you
occasionally attend dinner parties where people *are interested in what that opinion is*.

The only difference between sandwich photos in this imagined world, and wine, beer, or coffee in our
current one, is that the latter three are [Schelling
points](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Focal_point_(game_theory)). Being the only person to care
about something is, let's face it, kind of excruciating, so the natural choice is something which
presents a low barrier to finding other opinionated people.

Wait, is *that* why so many guys are obsessed with sports? I think I get it now.

Coffee is a perfect example of this. Most American adults drink it every day, and while only a small
minority ever become coffee nerds, "a small minority" of Americans is still millions of people. Any
sufficiently large city has at least one coffee shop with a knowledgeable staff, and for the
especially curious, every variable that goes into a cup is meticulously documented online. You'd
have a hard time finding a better thing to nerd out about. Wine is similar, but with more cultural
cachet---and hey, it gets you drunk!

The internet has decreased the barrier somewhat, which is why we see so many niche fandoms popping
up---if you want examples, scroll through [/r/HobbyDrama](https://old.reddit.com/r/HobbyDrama/).

Fans of [Paul Fussel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Fussell) might argue that strong opinions
on inconsequential things are symptomatic of an upper-middle-class status anxiety which seeks to
centers conversations around *anything* but ideas. This may be true for some, but if the your
conversation isn't jumping between beverages, politics, and god-knows-what-else, you're clearly
drinking with the wrong people.

So yes, let people enjoy things. But encourage them to articulate *why* they enjoy things, or why
they don't. Listen to them. Argue with them. Experiencing another mind's perspective on a subtle
distinction might be the best feeling there is.
